Welcome, friends. Welcome, everybody. So thank you so much for joining us. This is the fourth
session of us practicing the Dudjom TersaR Ngondro from Padmasamyaling at the request
of Venerable Kempo Saewandong, our precious teacher. So real quick, I'll just quickly recap
a little bit about what we've gone over so far. Lama Laia, I think, has gone through
in the previous sessions, specifically a little bit about, at least a little bit, about the
three noble ones of a noble beginning, noble middle, and noble ending or conclusion to
each of our practice sessions, so how to have a complete practice session of nundro, beginning
with the motivation, the noble motivation, continuing that motivation with our practice,
and then concluding it, dedicating the merit. So I'm very quickly just hitting some points,
so we're all kind of on the same page here of what we've covered a little bit so far.
I think Lama Laia went quickly over Shama to practice of calm-abiding meditation and
vipassana insight meditation, basically kind of setting the ground for us diving deeper
into what those two practices are as we keep moving in our practice, how that changes in
our experience, so he set that stage, and then also about body posture for formal meditation
practice sessions, and then in addition to the breath purification practice for basically
dispelling or clearing away or kind of just dropping all the tensions we have that we're
kind of stuck in temporarily and just relaxing and really settling and reconnecting with
the vitality of our body and our mind in the moment so our practice session can be very
uplifted and refreshed. So that's some of the train we've covered, right? Okay, some
of it. So then today what I'm going to do is really take a step back and do a bird's
eye view of kind of to orient this dujram tersar practice, which is such a profound
teaching that is said to encompass all the teachings of the Buddha, the 84,000 teachings
of the Buddha, all the practices, all the philosophical views in a condensed, essential
teaching we can practice everything at once in a single meditation session and then achieve
enlightenment within a single lifetime. This practice would do all of it. So this is a
gigantic topic and I think sometimes for me personally taking a step back and especially
at the beginning seeing how am I framing this practice because in order to do all that it
seems like I have to do it in a very specific way according to the lineage instructions.
And so the way I'm going to approach this here is I think a lot of people know over
the years and definitely certainly people here know I'm kind of a little bit obsessed
with the view, view, view, view, view. Philosophical view, world view, mindset, context, our
approach
to how do we approach the dharma. What's our view? How do we come to the dharma? So there
are all these teachings on the view, our world view we could say in one way our story. So
I'm going to talk about it a little bit today like what's the story that we always carry
with us? So the tricky point of us, of me as a sentient being is I always hold this
story line. And if you're a sentient being, probably you hold the story line too. And
the main character of the story, which I say is the story, but it's really my story, is
me. I'm the main character. And you're the main character of your story. And if we're
a sentient being, we all assume that. I'm the center of the story. So that's a little
difficult because there's a lot of people with a lot of stories happening that enter
in and exit our story, right? So story is just another word for view. How do I make
sense of this experience now? What's the purpose? What am I trying to get out of it? What's
my attitude? How do I approach it? How do I see myself in this practice? In this moment?
In my life? What's my story? I mean, am I the hero of my story? Am I the hero that gets
challenged and becomes a villain? Am I a villain? Am I an anti-hero? Am I a bumbling just normal
person? Am I going to save the day in the end? Is it a dystopian narrative? Is everything
burning? Is it a utopian narrative? This is all wonderful. So the Buddha taught all these
stories. They're called provisional teachings. And each Jhana or vehicle has its own story,
and that story has its own rhythms, and its own rules, and its own language, and its own
way of seeing ourself. Like, how do I tell the story to myself when I go from a basic
Buddhism, foundational Buddhism view? What's the story? And then a Sutra Mahayana view,
how does the story change? Is it different? What's the view? How does it expand? And similarly
then with a Tantra Mahayana view, how does that story or that view expand? What's my
role in it? What's your role in it? What's all of our roles in this story? Because the
fundamental thing is, we don't get to decide if we're going to tell a story or not. Every
single one of us walks around with this grand narrative about what life is about and who
I am and what I'm going to do and how the day is going to be and what I'm going to try
to get done. Like, that's all of you. And every single moment of our experience, we
hold a view. We hold a mindset, a worldview, a story, a tawa. And this Dejum Tersar Nundro,
it really assumes a very specific view in order for it to be practiced according to
the lineage instructions. And so it's really worth the time to get clear about, well, what
is that view of this Dejum Tersar Nundro? What's the story? So in Buddhism, there's always
two basic storylines. There's the conceptual one, which centers around characters doing
things and overcoming and achieving, failing and learning. And then there's the non-conceptual
one, which basically says, I'm not going to get obsessed with this story. I'm just going
to relax and let things unfold. So that's more of an absolute truth or non-conceptual.
So there's a non-conceptual view. And then there's a conceptual view or a conceptual story.
Right? I'm trying to kind of reframe this in a way that's a little different than how
we usually hear this, because part of the difficulty of so-called seasoned practitioners
of when we've been around the Dharma for a long time, we can kind of have a checklist
of all the things we've done and basically feel like, I'm great in this way. I did this.
I accumulated that. I have this. I've sat through this much. Now I can sit. I do all
these sessions and my story becomes very self-affirming and very me-centered and very much non-D
harmic.
Because in the end, the base-level story in Buddhism is not all about me, because everyone
has a story. And we all want to be happy. That's part of everyone's view, is we're all trying
every moment to do something to make us happy. Every breath we take, we want to feel happy.
And so the basic Buddhism, foundational Buddhism view or story, this so-called Hinayana or
Theravada-level view, is in a really specific way, the ship is sinking. So what am I going
to do? Or we're monkeys playing in a forest and there's a fire circling around us and it's
closing towards us, and that's just the situation of life. This is basic Buddhism. We're in
a house and it's on fire, and what am I going to do? It's called the first noble truths
of suffering. All conditioned existence involves difficulty and challenge. All of it, every
single moment of conditioned existence, anything dependently arisen comes together, stays together
temporarily and disentangles and disintegrates, disintegrates. And if we resist that coming
together or we resist the coming apart, that's suffering. But it's always moving. It's always
moving. We can't stop it. We can just utilize it or not. And so this comes to one fundamental
point about story making in our minds, is do we think the story's fixed? Am I stuck the
way I am? Is my story the way it is? Am I always the hero? Am I always the victim? Am
I always the villain? Am I always the scapegoat? Am I always the sidekick? Do we believe in
stories like that? I just am this way and there's kind of nothing I can do about it.
And so when life comes and challenges me, which is samsara, because things don't always
go along our story line, then if I think it's fixed, basically I'm going to try to do anything
I can to just do my best, but it's just in the end, it's like I did what I could, but
it's not my fault because I'm just this way. So that's a fixed view of stories. I have
this view. There's one way this goes, the end. So another type of mindset is called
a growing mindset. This happened, but I don't have to do the same thing I've done before.
My habits are flexible. I have all this potential. There's a teaching called Buddha Nature and
I can do this differently this time. I can totally change the direction. Like the Buddha
taught all these techniques. I'm going to use them now. This opportunity is a challenge.
I'm going to use it to do something different, to be curious about what broke or what the
failure was or how I can change and navigate the situation a little more creatively. Try
something new. Ask for help. Give in and surrender. Like, oh, I'm not really that good at this.
Okay, so let me take stock and see if I want to put more time in trying to cultivate this
quality. This is foundational in every Buddhist story. We have to be willing to change. Our
own capacity has that flexibility. Our habits are not fixed. They are not fundamentally
structured in any kind of an inherent existence, truly existent way. Buddhism in all levels
believes this. It's fundamentally flexible. We can get new bad habits and they can become
really stuck and we can get new good habits and they can become really resilient. But
it's flexible. And this is in one way of talking about emptiness. The mind is fundamentally
flexible. Reality is fundamentally flexible. Experience is fundamentally flexible. The
story can always change. Our view always has the opportunity to change right now. And that's
where our power lies right in this minute now. We can change our story or our view. We can
open it. We can become sensitive, curious, engaged, empowered. Like Buddha gave all these
techniques of how to basically lift off with more joy and appreciation, courage and commitment,
connection to other beings, seeing things purely. These are all techniques, skillful
means to Buddha gave for us to take on a new story intentionally, consciously. So that's
why in the beginning of all these sessions we supplicate the lineage. We meditate and
calm our minds. We do a breath purification to release things we're holding onto that
maybe we don't have to hold onto it. Maybe we just can relax and see what newly arises
right now. A fresh beginner's mind, right? So we're constantly trying to be in this fresh
poised, receptive, responsive, sensitive mind. This very growing mindset. This like way of
being that's really curious and really kind of very powerful. And so this thing with having
a story line, even if the story line is there is conditioned existence. What can I do about
it? The Buddha taught there's a path and there is a possibility of actually fundamentally
forever coming out of suffering. The Buddha taught this path so clearly, the A fold noble
path and the foundational teachings. It can be done and these masters have done it and
the Buddha did it and Guru Rinpoche did it and there's this little stainless golden lineage
of masters that did it and they told us how they did it. And now it's up to us. Like we
have to pop on our attention. We have to drop our story or we have to make a better story.
It doesn't just have to be anti-story. We can actually co-create a story given this
body we have, the things we've been through, the traumas we've experienced, the talents
we have, the friends around us. Like we can co-create a better story and then fundamentally
not really be so obsessed with how the story turns out. Because in the end, there's no
end. Right? Every story line has to come to an end but Buddha said the idea of an end
is not true. It keeps going. Cause effect, cause effect, cause conditions effect, cause
conditions effect. There's no end to the story. So if we have a really flexible state of mind,
that's good news. Cause that means we can keep helping as long as we don't have to make
it only according to my story. Then we can just keep hurting. That's really samsara.
It's called ego grasping, self absorption. We've been, we've heard these teachings so
many times, a narrative only about me all the time is really suffering. So foundational
Buddhism, the Buddha said, that is our typical story line. It's all about me. And there's
a way to actually love ourselves enough to drop that story and create a better story
to have a more expansive, inclusive view. Look for that me that we feel is so fixed
in this very specific way. It's me and this is my story and my language and my, my, my.
Look for that my, look for me, look for that feeling of me, the hero, the villain, the victim,
the practitioner, the whoever, prove it to me that that me is there. That was the Buddha's
challenge. Show me that that story is fixed. And if we take up that challenge, we get to
see that it's not as fixed as we thought. And we also get to see that in some ways,
we're really fixated in ways we didn't see before. And that can be a hard truth to see.
I am stuck in this way. I did that. I'm not an angry person. Maybe there's a lot of things
we have. It's hard to be self honest to be really have a really thorough self inquiry
where we don't just inquire about our awesome stuff, but we inquire about the places that
scare us and we're uncertain about and it's kind of iffy and we need help. We have to
be vulnerable. So we have this path, the Buddha, the great guide, the noble being Buddha, and
the Dharma, this guidebook, it's all these instructions on how to make more sense, how
to have a better story. And the Sangha, these fellow travelers, these companions, everyone's
our Sangha, the Buddhists, the non Buddhists, the insects, the all sentient beings, the aliens.
We're all in this together. This is a totally infinite boat and we're all in it and we can't
ever leave it. And the boat will never dock. It's just the story doesn't end. And that's
when this Sutra Mahayana story becomes really big. We all have this fixed story. Oh, but
what's your story? What makes you curious? What do you like? What are you passionate about?
What are you really interested in? What really kind of makes you come alive? Because I'm
interested in that. And all of a sudden there's so many stories to be interested in your view,
your view, this view, the bugs view, that view, this view. And all of a sudden, instead
of just being like this one view is the way, all of a sudden it's like, oh, there's all
these stories. There's all these users ways, different ways of directing it, producing
it, sound editing, all these. It's amazing. This artistic experience of being alive. It's
so creative. And our heart just reaches out because so many of these stories are really
about someone feeling like they're worthless and they're just, and they can't do it. And
the life is against them and it's over the end. The end is always just going to be a repeat
of a tragedy. So many stories are like that, you know? So then our heart reaches out like,
oh, is that really true? Like maybe I can be with you in some way where a little glimmer
of light comes in. It's not really that. You're not bad like that. You have so much potential.
There's so much beauty. Like even right now it's so beautiful. And a little bit, the story
opens. The view opens. The person's self-confidence opens. Our self-confidence and compassion
open. And all of a sudden we're creating stories together that are so much more aligned with
actual facts. The flexibility of the nature instead of the fiction. Which is, this is
just one set way. There's nothing I can do. I give up. Right? So to wrap up. What is this
Dujum Tersar story? It takes us and expands the Sutra Mahayana view into Tantra Mahayana
view. And where does every Tantra Mahayana view begin? No story. The beginning of every
practice, beginning of Seven Line Prayer. What does this mean in one way? Pop out of
any story line. See how you are before you assume a narrative. Is there part of your
awareness that doesn't have to be funneled through concepts? Through a view? That's what
the great noble master Nagarjuna said. The highest supreme view is the view beyond all
views. The view-less view. That's where this practice starts every time. And that's the
ideal in this book of Illuminating the Path by Venerable Kemba Rinpoche and his Holiness
Dujum Rinpoche. It gives such clear instructions on these two views. Non-conceptual view and
conceptual view. And we should really treasure them. This is like really, this is a guidebook.
This is the only thing we need to get out of Samsara to have a totally abrasive, amazing
story that will include all stories. That's all we'll ever need. And there's other guidebooks
like that that will do the exact same thing. It's such a fortunate time. And that story,
when we pop out of always having to have center around characters and there's going to be
a fixed end and we have to overcome, it says disrupt any story line. And so that's this
Tantra Mahayana view. Just disrupt it. Just pause. Break out of any story making. Then
there's some spaciousness. There's some openness. There's flexibility. All of a sudden there's
a lot of options on the table. And consciously choose what story you want to engage right
now. And the Tantra Mahayana view story, the view, is this is, there's no problem here.
It's all a celebration. We're in front of the refuge tree with Gururimache, Dakas, Dakinis,
Dharmapalas, all the Harukas, the Arhats, all the Bodhisattvas, the entire lineage up
to Gururimache with all these Dharma books surrounding us throughout space. That's the
setting of this story. And what am I? I'm this, I have this potential that can be fully
awakened in this lifetime just like you. And so I want to go for that. Let's go for that.
Like at least this session, like let's try to go for that. This time, maybe this time
I can actually do that right now. Pop into a non-story, non-view, post-view, beyond view,
however you want to call it. And then create the story of enlightened pure wisdom display.
This is Tantra. So this Dhujum Terasar is so profound. This is his only, his Dhujum
Terasar wrote this extensive commentary on this term of revelation that he received or
he kind of revealed from Guru Padmasambhava. And it's really worth our time to keep putting
the time in. Because the thing is, is these habits or these storylines, they die hard.
Basically because we've just made the groove really deep. Good habits, bad habits, no habits,
these deep negative habits, we have to actually not be convinced of those stories anymore.
We have to see how they're not true. We actually are fundamentally good. And these positive
habits like you're fundamentally good, you're fundamentally good, you and you and all of
us and everyone has this nature of Buddha nature and bodhicitta is the way reality functions.
Those are positive habits. We have to make really deep storylines because that's the
more correct story. It's the better story. It's the more true story. And finally, we
have to get out of the pop out of the bubble of fixating on how this is all
gonna end and what's the final storyline and who's in the credits. We're all in
the credits. We all contributed to every everyone. You were the director and you
were the director and you did this and you did that and you were the hero and
you were the hero and you're the villain and we all took all these roles for
infinite time. So now we can really go beyond this kind of story making and
just relax for a minute and just let the stories kind of happen and what does it
make us? It makes us available to actually meet people where their stories
are, where their view is. We open up some options for ourselves so then we can
actually show up in someone else's story and how can I help you in your story? How
can I match your view? And that's what the Buddha did like a mirror just
reflected people's views, their dispositions, their readiness, their
capability and just with such kindness and such love and compassion and
intelligence did just a little bit so that story could become a little more
creative and inclusive and loving towards themselves towards others. And so
we're fundamentally like have such great fortune to engage this Dhujum Terrasar
Nandro and to do this together. This is virtual here and it's in person here and
in one way this is all all it's all virtual this all these stories these
invisible and tangible stories we're all weaving together that's just it's always
how it's been and so we have this great opportunity to do this together to
really consciously choose this very brilliant very grounded practical
common sense empowered sophisticated simple way of creating a story together
creating a view that's really natural and that's just fundamentally who we are.
So I thank you for the opportunity to say a few things and then yay lama laya we
get to kind of follow Kemba Rinpoche and Kenshin Paul and Chair Rinpoche's lead
and his only student Rinpoche and all the lineage and practice these sacred
teachings together so really thank you so much for showing up thank you for
years of participation and if you're new warm welcome and so here we go thank you.
Drop who you are in how you thunk. Grace waves radiate from the plunk of stillness
deep in the lake of the heart of the mother of all sky.
[Silence]
We have about an hour for our practice so let's begin with the seven-line
prayer and then in the nundra sadhana we'll chant this call in the lama from afar.
Which begins on page 18 in this book. Are there different numbers in these nundras?
[Music]
Vajra Guru Perma Siddhihum Omahum Vajra Guru Edma Siddhihum
Omahum Vajra Guru Edma Siddhihum
The essence primordially unchanging the innate nature free from elaboration
dwells as the youthful face body the originally pure profound clarity dharmakaya
lama yeshe Dorje be aware of me please grant the blessings to attain great
confidence in the view the nature on ceasing conjoined configuration of
luminous clarity dwells as the display of the spontaneously present five
certainties sambhoga kaya lama ditchin Dorje be aware of me please grant the
blessing to perfect great ability and meditation the compassion without bias
the primordial wisdom free from all limitations dwells as the essence of all
pervading naked awareness emptiness nirvana kaya lama drona lingpa be aware
of me please grant the blessings to accomplish great progress and action the
primordial ground of one's own awareness is unchanging and unmoving whatever
arises as the expression of dharmakaya is neither good nor bad since awareness of
nowness is actually the Buddha the completely free serene lama is revealed
in one's innermost heart when this original mind is realized as the very
nature of the lama there is no need for whining contrived prayers made with
grasping and attachment by letting go in the free natural flow of uncontrived
awareness not holding whatever arises the blessings of self-liberation are
obtained through fabricated practice there is no time to achieve enlightenment
this meditation produced through mental analysis and intellect it is a seething
enemy now conceptualization falls apart with the abandon of a madman let this
life be spent in a state of uninhibited naked ease whatever one does joyful
practitioner of the great perfection in any company happy lineage holder of the
lotus-born protector without rival great treasure revealing llama teachings
beyond compare hard essence of the dakinis having dispelled the hearts
darkness great ignorance in its own place the undiminished son of luminous
clarity shines continuously this good fortune is the kindness of the llama the
only father unrepayable kindness only remember the llama unrepayable kindness
only remember the llama unrepayable kindness only remember the llama
continue the four thoughts that turn the mind
nammo me tindi kumpu lama chin tajodhini sindhu niparka chece mita jiwe
chuchenin gedi gletchi judre luwame kamsun ko vadukna jamsonam
drinya da glu chula churwa shul nammo llama invaluable constant protector be
aware of me the freedoms and favorable conditions of this human birth are
extremely difficult to obtain everything born is impermanent and bound to die the
results of virtuous and unvirtuous actions which are causes are inexorable
the three realms of cyclic existence of the nature of an ocean of suffering
remembering this may my mind turn towards the Dharma nammo llama invaluable
constant protector be aware of me the freedoms and favorable conditions of
this human birth are extremely difficult to attain everything born is impermanent
and bound to die the results of virtuous and unvirtuous actions which are causes
are inexorable the three realms of cyclic existence of the nature of an ocean of
suffering remembering this may my mind turn towards the Dharma nammo llama
invaluable constant protector be aware of me the freedoms and favorable
conditions of this human birth are extremely difficult to obtain everything
born is impermanent and bound to die the results of virtuous and unvirtuous
actions which are causes are inexorable the three realms of cyclic existence the
notion of an ocean of suffering remembering this may my mind turn
towards the Dharma
now we'll go to refuge with prostrations as usual we'll begin just
with the visualization and on bodhicitta taking refuge in the presence of the
refuge tree we'll chant together and then we'll all get up here and if you join us
there we'll do maybe about three or four minutes of prostrations with refuge
days on chung chu ning po mato bar llama con cho sum la tab suchi from now until
attaining the heart of enlightenment I take refuge in the llama the three jewels
from now until attaining the heart of enlightenment I take refuge in the llama
the three jewels from now until attaining the heart of enlightenment I take refuge
in the lama the three jewels days on chung chu ning po mato bar llama con cho sum la tab suchi days
on
chung chu ning po mato bar llama con cho sum la tab suchi days on chung chu ning po
mato bar llama con cho sum la tab suchi from now until attaining the heart of
enlightenment I take refuge in the llama the three jewels from now until attaining
the heart of enlightenment I take refuge in the llama the three jewels from now until attaining the
heart of enlightenment I take refuge in the llama the three jewels
from now until attaining the heart of enlightenment I take refuge in the llama the three jewels
from now until attaining the heart of enlightenment
I take refuge in the llama the three jewels from now until attaining the heart of enlightenment I
take refuge in the llama the three jewels from now until attaining the heart of enlightenment
from now until attaining the heart of enlightenment I take refuge in the llama the three jewels
from now until attaining the heart of enlightenment I take refuge in the heart of enlightenment I
take refuge in the llama the three jewels from now until attaining the heart of enlightenment I
take refuge in the llama
now
[silence]
The heart and enlightenment.
[singing]
From now until the attainment of the heart and enlightenment
I take refuge in the Lama, the Three Jewels.
[silence]
From now until the attainment of the heart and enlightenment
I take refuge in the Lama, the Three Jewels.
[silence]
Now all the sentient beings before us, our mother and father of this life
all like a flock of birds alight and merge into the refuge tree.
They all dissolve into the form of Guru Padmasambhava.
And we merge into the heart of Padmasambhava.
[silence]
I continue with the Generating Bodhicitta, page 30.
Beseeching all the objects of refuge embodied as Guru Padmasambhava to bear witness.
And then I think we're all familiar with group practice
but in case anyone's wondering what's going on
we'll all chant together with our motivation, with our view, with our intention
and we'll do that together and then we'll all go at our own rate
and then I'll kind of signal when we're kind of coming to the end of this section
and then we'll again drop everything and meditate in the Absolute Bodhicitta.
[singing]
From now until samsara becomes empty
I shall accomplish the benefits and happiness of all sentient parent beings.
[singing]
From now until samsara becomes empty
I shall accomplish the benefits and happiness of all sentient parent beings.
[singing]
We continue with accumulation of merit, the mandala offering, offering up everything.
So with the visualization, if you have your mandala plate and offerings,
then that's excellent and wonderful.
Please make offerings with that, along with all the other parts of the meditation.
And then we also have the mudra, if you don't.
[singing]
The bodies, enjoyments, possessions and glories, the succession of all my lifetimes,
I offer to the three jewels in order to complete the two accumulations.
[singing]
The bodies, enjoyments, possessions and glories, the succession of all my lifetimes,
I offer to the three jewels in order to complete the two accumulations.
The bodies, enjoyments, the succession of all my lifetimes,
The bodies, enjoyments, possessions and glories, the succession of all my lifetimes,
I offer to the three jewels in order to complete the two accumulations.
The bodies, enjoyments, the possessions and glories, the succession of all my lifetimes,
The bodies, enjoyments, the succession of all my lifetimes,
I offer to the three jewels in order to complete the two accumulations.
The bodies, enjoyments, the possessions and glories, the succession of all my lifetimes,
...
Now, next section, purification of obscurations, meditation of vatrasattva.
Using the four powers.
...
Above one's head is vatrasattva, inseparable from the lama,
from vatrasattva's body and an extra stream descends, purifying one's obscurations.
...
Next page, 36, "Swiftly
and Blessing of Guru Yoga"
...
Connecting with Buddha Amitabha will continue in page 40.